hey everyone this is kamran and welcome
to the second video of the
authentication series our first video
was the introduction where we discussed
authentication authorization types of
authentication authentication factors
and so on in this video we will be
talking about the basic authentication
and we will see how we can implement the
basic authentication in node.js before
we begin you should not confuse the
basic authentication with the normal
username and password authentication
basic authentication is the part of HTTP
specification and the details can be
found in the RFC 7617 and because it is
a part of the HTTP specs all the major
browsers have the native support for
this for example you might have seen
this screen in the Chrome or this screen
in Safari so this is your browser's
implementation of the basic
authentication alright so the question
is how do we make the browser show this
authentication pop-up let's say that you
visit some page which is protected by
the basic authentication how does the
browser know that it needs to show the
authentication popup and the answer is
it is controlled by the response of the
server so let's say that you try
requesting this protected URL so the
request will be sent to the server the
server will check if there is
authentication header present on the
request because this is the first
request there will be no header on the
request so the server will send the
response in a specific way that will
tell the browser to show the
authentication pop-up the response will
have the status code of 401 unauthorized
and there will be a special header
called
www.authenticate with the value set to
basic which tells the browser that we
need the basic authentication and we
have additional parameter called realm
which is just a value assigned to a
group of pages which share the same
credentials the realm might be used by
the browser to Cache the credentials so
that later on in the future if we have
the authentication failure on a
different page which has the same realm
the browser might use the cached
credentials for that realm without
asking the user alright so the server
will send this response to the browser
now when the browser will notice that
www.authenticate header it will show the
authentication screen to the user now
when the user submits this form the
browser will automatically encode the
credentials using the basics E4 encoding
and it will send them in the
authorization header of the same request
now the server will decode the header
and verify the username and password and
if both are valid then the server will
respond with the successful response
and this is how the basic authentication
works alright to summarize the user
tries to request some protected URL the
server doesn't find the authorization
header so it sends the response with the
www.authenticate header the browser
finds the authenticate header and shows
the login popup on submission of the
form the browser uses the base64
encoding to send the credentials in the
authorization header the server verifies
the credentials and grants the access so
this is how the basic authentication
works
there is one thing you should keep in
mind if you're using basic
authentication the credentials are sent
by the browser in the plain text format
so anyone sitting between you and the
server can intercept the request and
decode the credentials so for security
reasons if you're using basic
authentication you should always use
https instead of HTTP alright before we
end the video let's see how we can
implement the basic authentication in
node.js here I have the URL add
localhost column 3000 where I have
implemented the basic authentication as
you can see when I try to access this
URL the browser is asking me for the
username and password and if I submit
the wrong values it doesn't let me go
through
and if I enter the valid credentials I
can finally log in and see the response
let's look at the code base to see how
it is working
here I have a simple node.js application
if I open up the packet.json we have a
start script which is running the file
at SRC slash index.js if you look at
this file we have a simple Express
server which is listening on the port
3000 and we have a single page which is
returning hello world our basic
authentication is implemented inside the
OS middleware and if you open the
middleware file you will see that we are
getting the authorization header we are
decoding the credentials to get the
username and the password and then we
are checking if the username is set to
admin and password is set to admin then
serves the request otherwise we send the
authenticate header with the basic value
and the realm set to user pages and we
send the 401 response with our message
authentication required and inside the
decode credentials we are simply getting
the auth header which has the value of
basic space encoded credentials we are
removing the basic part from the
beginning so this part and then we are
decoding the credentials using base64
and after that we are spreading the
username and password and returning it
to the parent function and that is how
you implement the basic authentication I
have pushed this code to GitHub and the
link to the project can be found in the
description and that is all for this one
if you have any questions or comments
leave them below and I will see you in
the next one